Onchain development - Updated Intro to onchain lesson (#415)
solana-foundation/developer-content: content/courses/onchain-development/intro-to-onchain.md

## Summary

- **Onchain programs** are programs that run on Solana.
- Programs contain one or more **instruction handlers**. These are functions
  that process **instructions** within Solana transactions.
- Instruction handlers write data to Solana **accounts** and either succeed or
  fail.
- Solana programs are commonly written in **Rust** with the **Anchor**
  framework.
- Anchor programs have IDLs (Interface Description Language) and small JSON
  files that describe programs. IDLs can be used to automatically generate JS/TS
  libraries for a program.

## Overview

> Each Solana cluster (`mainnet-beta`, `testnet`, `devnet`, `localnet`) functions
> as a single computer with a globally synchronized state. The programs that
> operate on Solana—creating tokens, swapping tokens, powering art marketplaces,
> escrows, market makers, DePIN apps, auctions, retail payment platforms, and
> more—are referred to as **Solana apps**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Solana cluster (`mainnet-beta`, `testnet`, `devnet`) functions
as a single computer with a globally synchronized state. The programs that
operate on Solana—creating tokens, swapping tokens, powering art marketplaces,
escrows, market makers, DePIN apps, auctions, retail payment platforms, and
more—are referred to as **Solana apps**.
```

Reviewer: Technically localnet isn't a cluster.

Author: I have merged the main branch and removed localnet from the list.

The most popular way to build onchain apps is by using the **Rust** language and
the **Anchor** framework.

These frameworks automate common security checks and handle tasks such as:

- Routing incoming instructions to the appropriate instruction handlers.

> - Deserializing data from incoming transactions.
> - Validating accounts provided with instructions, such as ensuring that certain
>   accounts are of a specific type or distinct from other accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deserializing data from incoming instructions.
- Validating accounts provided with instructions, such as ensuring that certain
  accounts have signed the transaction, are of a specific type, or are distinct from other accounts.
```

Author: I have merged the main branch and incorporated suggestions accordingly.

    with other programs.
- The 'value' is the data stored inside the account at the given address,
  defined by you, the developer.

Key-value stores enable your onchain program and client software to consistently
determine the address for a data item because the same seeds will always return
the same address.

#### How PDAs Work

1. **Key**: The PDA address, derived from seeds you choose as a developer.
2. **Value**: The data stored in the account at that address.

#### Examples

Here's a table illustrating various use cases for PDAs:

| Use Case          | Seeds                          | PDA (Key)       | Value (Data Stored)                        |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------ | --------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Exchange Rate     | `["USD", "AUD"]`               | Derived address | Current USD to AUD exchange rate           |
| User Relationship | `[user1_wallet, user2_wallet]` | Derived address | Relationship data (e.g., friends, blocked) |
| Movie Review      | `[reviewer_wallet, "titanic"]` | Derived address | Review text, rating, timestamp             |

> | Global Config     | `["config"]`                   | Derived address | Program-wide settings                      |

Reviewer: Not sure if I mentioned it before but I love this table, and will use it in our other work.

Author: Thanks! @mikemaccana I appreciate it.

2. **Uniqueness**: PDAs are unique to your program, preventing conflicts with
   other programs.
3. **Flexibility**: You can create complex data structures by carefully choosing
   your seeds.
4. **Efficiency**: Quick and deterministic access to data based on known
   parameters (seeds).

### Solana instructions need to specify all the accounts they will use

As you may already know, Solana is fast because it can process non-overlapping
transactions simultaneously. For example, Alice sending tokens to Bob doesn’t
stop Chris from sending tokens to Diana. Your front-end apps need to specify the
addresses of all the accounts they will use.

This includes the PDAs you create. Fortunately, you can calculate the address
for PDAs in your front-end code before writing data to them.

```typescript
import { PublicKey } from "@solana/web3.js";

// There's nothing at this address right now, but we'll use it in our transaction
const [address, bump] = PublicKey.findProgramAddressSync(
  [Buffer.from("seed"), Buffer.from("another seed")],
  PROGRAM_ID,
);
```

### There are multiple ways to build onchain, but we recommend Anchor

You currently have two options for onchain program development:

> - We recommend new developers start with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We recommend new developers 
```

Author: Resolved as a suggestion.

  [start with Anchor](/content/courses/onchain-development/intro-to-anchor).
  Anchor's defaults make it easy to create secure programs.
- There is also a course on
  [native onchain program development](/content/courses/native-onchain-development).

Whichever approach you choose, the Solana Foundation provides

> [examples in both languages](https://github.com/solana-developers/program-examples),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[examples in both Anchor and native Rust](https://github.com/solana-developers/program-examples),
```

Author: I have updated the link text as per a suggestion.
